---
title: Appendix 2. Reassurance
weight: 22
---

## Appendix 2. Reassurance. (not sure I have all this right -- may be revised)

Our riverine experiences taught us all that no matter how unlikely
success might seem, hard work and determination could get the job done.
So what happened in later life to those 12 guys who were all together in
the right place at the right time?

Martin Bartlett Practiced medicine in the U.S and Australia, returning
to the U.K in 1965 to spend 30 years as a GP.

David Bright Engineering work on all three V bombers; instructor at RAF
Staff College; support for ops. in Cyprus and NATO forces in Germany.

Ian Dodds Joined NASA in '62; Apollo moon project; Space Station
programme; Wernher von Braun's director of long-term planning.

Bill Gear Wrangler. U.S. National Academy of Engineering, and Academy of
Arts & Sciences. 10 years heading up NEC's basic research unit in
Princeton.

David Harper Vet. -- companion animal practice. Generation took over
from Herriot and saw total change, to use of electromagnetic resonance.

Gordon Hewlett 40 years as a GP in the Cambridge area and still in
harness.

Edward Jackson Civil engineering. Dam and irrigation projects in 40
countries: Central and S.E.Asia, South America and many in Africa.

Paul Metcalf Nat. service in Navy; taught in Africa; 3 Â½ year project in
U.A.E.; computer prog with many U.S. companies, including own.

Brian Oxley Glassmaking around the world.

Christopher Phelps Moved to Oxford to help them with mathematics;
computerized the Bodleian; Dean of St Edmund Hall

Mike Smith Vet -- small animals. (He and David Harper may have been the
only vets to go through Peterhouse as subj. now not an option. )

Robert van Hoeken Director of IBM Europe and sadly the only one no
longer with us -- mugged and killed in Germany several years ago.

... those careers were tackled with the enthusiasm revealed in the boat.
That can be also be said of others of our period. For example, Martin's
brother, John, became President of the Royal Society of Neurological
Surgeons. Chris Calladine, a notable Fellow of Peterhouse and stalwart
supporter of PBC applied his engineering to the structures of biological
molecules. Bob Elphick -- journalist extraordinaire -- Reuters, BBC --
writer.

**Remembering Robert van Hoeken:**

![](/you_can_win_this/media/image21.jpeg)

Above: Robert (L) and Ian at the Lent Bumps supper.

Below: at the bonfire.

![](/you_can_win_this/media/image22.jpeg)