---
title: Appendix 3. More memories
weight: 23
---

## Appendix 3. More memories (in the order received)

From **Chris Calladine**, regarding instructions given to Danny Taylor:

*"Yes, Roy Lubbock was the senior Fellow and the Engineering don (since
1919).  As told me by someone (possibly Danny), he told Danny not to
worry too much about super-vising engineering students, but to put his
back into coaching the VIII. Roy told me that when he saw the Ladies\'
plate which you brought to the college, he immediately recognised it: it
stood on his housemaster\'s mantle-piece when he was a new boy at
Eton!"* (Note: Eton won the Ladies in 1893 - 99, again in 1904 -- 05 and
in 1910 - 12.)

**Ian Dodds** responded to the draft of this opus as follows:

*"Hard work and commitment---basic Fairbairnism and mileage make-eth
champions; philosophy of "anything worth doing is worth doing well;"
success breeds success---after the Fours and Fairbairn, Peterhouse
really had something to work towards and prove; effective but
non-coercive leadership from Brian O and Danny T---the best leadership
is that which is least obvious; and underpinned by a good second boat in
1954 and 1955."*

*On a more personal note:*

*- Broke oar early in a Tideway Race which caused it to flap
ineffectually for the remainder of the race but the boat still did
well\-\--proved something. Ernie lettered it up following the Fairbairn
and it is still on the wall at home fifty years later after perhaps 30
house moves.* (B: That was the London R.C. Colleges regatta on a dark
and stormy night. We still came away with the medals.)

*- Attending a late afternoon Special Lecture on Quantum Mechanics after
a double outing---being woken by the Guest Lecturer asking "would the
person sleeping on the back row please leave!"*

*- As a first year PhD student an interview in the autumn of 1955 with
Professor Mair (Thesis Supervisor and Head of Aeronautics Dept) who
suggested that rowing was an activity suitable for undergraduates but
quite unsuitable for postgraduates being paid to work on cutting edge
Aeronautical Research\-\--however this offered an easy
non-confrontational way of getting Martin Bartlett into the Boat which
was clearly critical to the subsequent successes.*

*- Josephine on the towpath even for early outings---she soon became the
mascot of the boat. We all fell in love with her just a little*.

*- Arriving at Red Lion (Staines) after an all day row from Reading and
then going straight to bed without dinner or even a
beer---unprecedented - never been so tired*!

(B: Now I remember that Ian stepped in for '56 Reading and didn't slow
us down.)

\- Painful boils on my backside at Henley ('57?) carefully dressed by
"soon to be Dr. Hewlett".

**Howard Leach, a stalwart of the club for four years and Captain in
'54/'55 :**

"I witnessed the build-up to that year firsthand. Coming up in '51, 1
had never having rowed before. Bob Elphick was Captain and I remember
him sitting me in a bank tub and explaining to me how to get a bell
note. Legend has it that I got one on my first try, but I don't remember
that. I acquired a copy of "Steve Fairbairn on Rowing", and almost
memorized it.

*When paddling firm we punched the blade in with our legs as hard as we
could and then held the drive for as long as we could. No saving
ourselves for later. Nowadays it would be called "interval training". We
didn't worry about how we looked, and if we wanted to we turned our
heads to watch our blades enter the water; maybe because of this our
balance was terrible and it should be discouraged except for beginners.
I made it to the 1^st^ May boat that year, and I considered it to be a
great honour. The following year I was in the Lent boat that won its
oars to go up to 7^th^ place. I didn't row in the Mays, because I wanted
to get a first in Mechanical Sciences, which I accomplished.*

*I firmly believe that it was the "palace revolution" and the adoption
of the Fairbairn style in '48, as practiced by Jesus, that enabled the
club to reach the point that the achievements of the '55-56 crew were
possible. But it needed the hard work, "smarts" and dedication of that
crew to achieve what they did. We owe the '48 people a debt of
gratitude. Peterhouse needs a style of rowing that is reasonably
efficient and can be mastered by beginners quickly. But the subsequent
captains and crews that maintained and embedded that tradition also
deserve thanks. Because of that Peterhouse crews did well. Rowing was
fun and we expected to win. I understand the '56 crew tightened up their
entry into the water. They could do that because they were already
experienced.*

*Other colleges didn't follow our lead. Lady Margaret was the dominant
club in that period and they had an exaggerated lay-back at the end of
their stroke. Some said that they did that so they could shake the drips
off the end of their oars! They had no trouble maintaining their
headship of the Mays and were the dominant force in the Blue Boat. So
their way became the fashionable way. Jesus and Peterhouse were the
exceptions.*

*I became Captain of Boats for the '54-55 year and Brian Oxley became
Secretary. We shared a room on H-staircase. We were the same age, but
Brian had come to Peterhouse two years later than me. He had been doing
his national service with the S.A.S. in the Malayan jungle, with a gun
in his hand, expecting to be shot at, while I spent my time enjoying
life at Peterhouse. His last expedition prior to getting into a boat at
P.B.C. was on a bamboo raft!. The S.A.S. were a pretty tough bunch!
Maybe this had something to do with our subsequent success.*

*I remember suggesting to Martin Bartlett, who had just come up, having
distinguished himself at Radley School, that he should aim to get a
Blue, and that to do that he needed to win the Colqhouns. He did that
and got his blue. I think Mike Smith should have got one too. He was
heavy, and he was probably considered \"rough\", but if you looked at
his oar during his stroke, you could see that it was bent back nearly
double!*

*Brian was studying Natural Sciences. But he was a fine musician, having
been on the first desk of a national youth orchestra. Wherever he went
he assembled a string quartet, and I enjoyed many "concerts" in our
room. Gordon Hewlett, who was a choral scholar and later stroke of the
'56 crew, also played in the quartet. Brian tried to persuade me to join
them and play the clarinet part in Mozart's Clarinet Quintet, but I felt
that my clarinet playing wasn't up to that. I often replay a recording
of it to this day, now on my iPod! Once I did play Chopin's Waltz in C#
minor on the piano at a College concert attended by the Master,
P.C.Vellacott. My performance was rather heavy handed and
expressionless, a fact that was pointed out to me by a member of the
boat club. Many years later a piano teacher told me that there are a
hundred ways to play a note on a piano, but mine wasn't one of them! I
also played saxophone and clarinet in an undergraduate dance band.*

*By the May 1955 term I was exhausted from rowing \-- it was my fourth
year in the 1^st^ boat -- so I stood down and coached the 1^st^ and
2^nd^ boats instead. We concentrated on carrying through a strong entry
to a strong finish. The 1^st^ boat was a disappointment. I remember
asking Martin Bartlett what he thought was wrong. He kindly suggested
that they needed me in the boat. I wasn't a heavyweight and I didn't
think that I would have been that much more effective than whoever
replaced me.*

*The 2^nd^ boat was another matter. I had been coaching them all year
and they were a great crew. By the end of the May term I felt they were
as fast as the 1^st^ boat. They won their oars in the Mays. The
subsequent merging of the 1^st^ and 2^nd^ boat crews must have given the
'55-56 year a tremendous start. At the reunion 10 years ago I was
talking to Dave Nelson. He was a big guy who was in that 2nd boat. When
I spoke to him he was a US Federal Appeals Court Sixth Circuit justice,
and had been considered for the US Supreme Court. He remembered me as
the coach.*

*After the Mays I left Cambridge to do my national service in the Royal
Navy and handed over the captaincy to Brian. That gave him the chance to
take over for Henley and to prepare for the following year.*

*It was while playing in the band at Homerton College's Christmas Ball
that I met Jo, who was one of the organisers. I introduced her to
Peterhouse. She was an attractive, vivacious girl, as Ian Dodds has
remembered. I fell for her \-- and not just a little. But Jo decided
that Brian was the one. They were married soon after the end of that
year, and are still together today, as I write, fifty years later.*

\[Comment: Howard's remarks on the '55 Mays 2^nd^ boat are important.
Members of that crew may recall a trial sprint in Long Reach, when they
beat the 1^st^ boat. Danny was dismayed! It says a lot about the overall
strength of the club that we had two such good eights on the water at
the same time. That 2^nd^ boat bumped the sandwich boat, Trinity Hall 3,
on the first night, then 1^st^ & 3^rd^ 3, Selwyn 2, Christ's 2 and Caths
2. From that strength, we drew Gordon and Robert for Henley, then Ted
Jackson , Ian Dodds and David Harper the following year. Riches
indeed!\]

**From David Harper,** regarding our arrival at LRC after rowing down
from Reading:

"We arrived before lunch. As bow, I was the first to arrive. A boatman
hurried down the hard, yanking on his waders as he came, and grabbed my
blade to pull us in -- not tenderly as Ernie would have done. Perhaps
because we weren't expected until the next day, he asked "What kept
you?"

**From Bob Beresford,** about Reading and other matters:

*"I saw quite a bit of the boat club when I was in the army in 1956
stationed at Arborfield six miles south of Reading, you asked me to find
accommodation for the head of the river crew and a little pub called The
Rising Sun in the middle of Reading, which I knew, proved suitable. I
was on the towpath for the race, and unknown to me I had suddenly been
put on a weekend guard, chums substituted for me and came out to tell me
and I made a rapid return to substitute at the Saturday evening guard
for the man who had answered to my name on the Friday. I also cycled
over to Henley a few times and remember Mrs Hammond, someone introduced
me to Jack Beresford* \[famous in the history of British rowing!\] *on
the towpath, a most courteous man, and I met Tom Askwith of course, to
whom I was delighted to chat at \"gatherings\" in the late \'nineties. I
was unable to get to the final, alas!"*

* *

###### **Additions welcome from all years - for a final version**

(Paragraph -- illustrative of the times -- preferably funny)

